We're thankful for God's grace, aren't you?
And what a blessing.
I trust that Mr. Don and Mr. Regine are watching online this morning, and that he was encouraged
by that as well.
Amazing Grace, his favorite song, I know that was a medley, but we certainly thank the Lord
for his grace.
His grace is sufficient, amen?
And all of last year, preaching through the book of 2 Corinthians, and reminded repeatedly
throughout the year that God's grace is sufficient.
We experienced it, preached about it, and are thankful for it.
And I told you this at the end of the year, don't forget that God's grace is sufficient.
We go into a new year, we have a new theme, doers of the word, preaching through the book
of James, but God's grace is still sufficient, and I'm so thankful for that wonderful promise
that God has given to us.
In James chapter number 1, we'll continue.
Here we've had the opportunity for a few weeks now to be in the book of James, as we
started a new theme for the new year here in 2026, and of course, thankful for the practical
nature, the instruction that God gives us.
I mentioned this at the very beginning of our study into the book of James, that the
book of James is extremely practical, very applicable truth that we find in God's word.
And by the way, God's word is profitable for us, it's profitable for how we are to
live and how we're to behave, and we're to apply God's word in our lives.
We are to be doers of the word and not hearers only, and we see that that is the theme that
we have selected here for 2026, and of course, from James 1 and verse 22.
But also, as you look at the word of God in your daily life, as you're reading the Bible,
what does God have for me?
What can I take?
What principle do I need to apply in my life so that I can be a doer of the word and not
a hearer only?
We mentioned that James gets right into it here in the book of James, and he starts,
he gives that introduction, he's a servant, and what a blessing it is to be a servant
of the Lord Jesus Christ.
He then says, my brethren, count it all joy when you fall into divers temptations, and
I mentioned as I preached through those couple of verses, in verses 2 through 4, about the
importance of understanding that the truth that is given was something that those original
recipients were dealing with many trials, but for Christians throughout the history,
we too can understand and identify with the trials and difficulties that we endure as
we seek to live for the Lord, and he gives us principles that are to be applied in our
lives.
He talks about the importance of needing wisdom.
God, I need wisdom.
We lack wisdom, and we understand that God has given to us a wonderful promise in his
word that if we were to ask him, that he'll give it to us, and what a blessing to know.
I pray for wisdom all of the time.
Lord, I need wisdom, and we said this, that wisdom comes from his word, and I'm thankful
that he's given us a Bible, that we have the complete canon of scripture, and he teaches
us his word, and he gives us wisdom as we spend time in his word.
As we begin looking with me this morning at verse number 9, we'll look at verses 9 through
11.
The subject of finances is now going to be quickly addressed, and again, this is another
subject that impacts every single one of us.
Notice in verse 9, it says, let the brother of low degree rejoice in that he is exalted,
but the rich in that he is made low, because as the flower of the grass he shall pass away.
For the sun is no sooner risen with a burning heat, but it withereth, the grass, and the
flower thereof falleth, and the grace and the fashion of it perisheth.
So also shall the rich man fade away in his ways.
He'll deal with the subject of finances again later in the book, but we find here in verses
9 through 11, as we look at these verses this morning, I want you to understand that again,
finances is one of those subjects that impacts every single one of us.
Trials impacts every one of us, finances impacts every one of us, and the Bible has much to
say regarding our finances, and I believe that it's important as a child of God, as
a believer, to have a biblical perspective when it comes to our finances.
We understand that God's Word speaks about every area of your life and my life, and there
are principles that we take and we apply, and we find that the subject of finances is
one that is readily discussed throughout the Bible.
Let me read these verses to you before we dig in here to James chapter 1, and Proverbs
23, and I'll just read the verses to you.
In verses 4 and 5, here's what the Bible says.
That's Proverbs chapter 23, verses 4 and 5, and it's interesting how the subject of
wisdom is dealt with here in James 1 and verse 5, and the subject of finances is then dealt
with, and the wise man, Solomon, said, labor not to be rich, cease from thine own wisdom.
How often we'll hear young people talk about various career fields in which they may be
interested in entering into because of the potential for wealth, the potential for prosperity,
the type of job that they're looking or the career that they're seeking, many times is
dictated by the potential earnings of that specific field, and we find here that the
Scriptures, not only in the book of Proverbs, many other places here in the book of James,
are going to deal with the subject of finances, and I've titled the message really from the
verse there in Proverbs, riches make wings.
Riches make wings, but I want you to notice something very important by way of introduction
as we enter into the passage.
In verse number 9 and verse number 10, he's speaking to two different groups of people.
He uses the singular use of the words, but we find that really people would find themselves
in one of these two categories.
In verse 9, he says, let the brother of low degree.
In verse number 10, he says, but the rich, and we find that in both cases, he says, let
the brother of low degree rejoice.
We don't see the word rejoice in verse number 10, but we understand that it would be carried,
the thought is carried into verse number 10, but the rich are to rejoice.
What are they rejoicing?
Well, in verse 9, the brother of low degree in that he is exalted.
Can I tell you that's easy?
It's easy.
The brother of low degree to rejoice when he's exalted, when there's gain.
That's easy.
He says in verse number 10, but the rich in that he is made low.
That's a lot more complicated, a lot more complicated.
But I want you to be mindful as we begin studying the book of James, that in verse number 2,
notice what the Bible says.
My brethren count it all.
What's the word say?
Joy.
When you fall into divers temptations, and we mentioned as we began studying the book
of James, that that phrase divers temptations literally means various trials.
And the trials come in different shapes and different forms.
You've had trials, I've had trials, and sometimes those trials may be financial in nature.
And so we find that he says, count it all joy when you fall into divers temptations,
knowing this, and I preached through these verses a few weeks ago, that the trying of
your faith worketh patience, but let patience ever perfect work, that you may be perfect
and entire, wanting nothing.
And then we come to verses 9 and 10, and he says, but let the brother of low degree rejoice
in that he is exalted.
The idea of rejoicing is carried into verse number 10 with regard to the rich.
Let me say this, the word joy in verse number 2 is a noun.
The word rejoice in verses 9 and 10 is a verb.
This is easy, right?
I mean, this is English kind of basic grammar, but I want you to understand that rejoicing
is something that we do because of the joy that we have.
And we find that the idea of rejoicing is the expression of our joy.
And oftentimes as people, as human beings, we rejoice when things are good.
It's easy.
The world can do that, right?
But he says, count it all joy when you fall into divers temptations.
And then he's going to make the very practical application for us when it comes to the subject
of finances.
And he says, rejoice.
The verb, the action, the outworking, the expression of that joy is that the one that
is of low degree is to rejoice when he's exalted, but the one that is rich is to rejoice when
he's made low.
I taught a lesson in our Sunday school hour this morning for the teenagers.
Rejoice evermore.
And I told them this from 1 Thessalonians 5 and verse 16, that before they got upstairs,
they could have that verse of scripture memorized.
Rejoice evermore.
And I asked them this question, is that verse hard to understand?
It really isn't.
All of those in the Sunday school class this morning, nine of those teenagers, they all
agreed, no, rejoice evermore is not hard to understand.
But then I asked them this, is it hard to practice?
And all nine of them agreed that it's a lot harder to practice than for us to understand.
Because to rejoice evermore, as Paul says there to the believers in Thessalonica, is
similar to what he says to the believers in Philippi when he says, rejoice in the Lord
always, and again I say, rejoice.
We looked at this verse of scripture as well in Psalm 118 and verse 24, and it's a verse
that many of us are familiar with, when the Bible says, this is the day the Lord hath
made, I'm going to see how things go and then we'll rejoice if it goes the way I like it.
That's not what the Bible says.
This is the day the Lord hath made, we will rejoice and be glad in it.
That's a wonderful declaration of the psalmist, recognizing that they are purposed to rejoice.
Why?
Because it is the day the Lord hath made.
Can I tell you this morning that other people need to hear you rejoice?
I mean other brothers and sisters in Christ need to hear you rejoice.
Can I tell you the lost world needs to hear you rejoice?
They need to know how good our God is.
Amen?
We're to rejoice privately, but we're to rejoice publicly, that the others would hear
and understand how great our God is.
And so as we dig in, I would say this this morning, if we could summarize the idea of
verses 9 and 10, loss or gain, or maybe I should say gain or loss, because verse 9 deals
with gain and verse 10 with loss.
Gain or loss, let me say this, God is good.
God is good.
I have written and I've shared it many times in the last year on a little 3 by 5 index
card sitting on my desk that we praise God not because things are always good, but because
He is always good.
God is good.
The psalmist said, taste and see that the Lord is good.
He's good all the time.
We find here this morning that as we look at this passage, I want to give you some principles
that I hope will help you.
Let's look at the verses, verses 9 through 11.
If you're taking notes, number one, a lack of wealth can discourage, a lack of wealth
can discourage.
The Bible says, let the brother of low degree rejoice in that he is exalted.
And we understand again that he's talking about that one that's of low degree that that's
in that state.
And he says, rejoice in that he is exalted, that he would have gain.
He says in verse 10, but the rich and that he is made low.
And so we find that in different times, different circumstances of life, there may be that time
that there is a lack.
Can I tell you that when there's a lack, it can bring discouragement.
And can I tell you this morning that the devil wants to discourage you?
He wants to discourage me.
And he wants us to get our eyes on temporal things.
He wants to discourage.
And the reality is that we can find that a lack of wealth, a lack of what we think we
may need can bring discouragement in the life of God's people.
I want you to think about this.
Look back in the Old Testament.
Look at two examples.
Go back, if you will, to first Kings chapter 17.
And I want you to consider with me, it's a great passage of scripture that we often look
at with regard to the prophet of God, Elijah, and what a blessing to read and to understand
the life of Elijah.
Here in first Kings chapter 17, God was going to use a widow, a widow of Zarephath to help
provide for the man of God.
If you're familiar with the portion of scripture, you'll understand the circumstances in which
this widow was facing.
And we won't read the entirety of the passage, but I want to just look at verse number 12
with you this morning.
And I want you to see the perspective of this widow.
We find that, and look at verse 11 with it, it says, and as she was going to fetch it,
he called to her and said, bring me, I pray, the morsel of bread in thine hand.
And she said, here's the widow's response to Elijah, as the Lord thy God liveth, I have
not a cake, but a handful of meal in a barrel and a little oil and cruise.
Behold, I am gathering two sticks that I may go in and dress it for me and my son.
Notice what she says, that we may eat it and die.
There was a lack.
They were dealing with famine.
They were dealing with a period of no rain.
Why?
Because it was God's judgment, because of the wickedness, and it had been announced
by Elijah as God had given him the instruction to stand before Ahab.
And we find that here she's in this situation, in this circumstance in life, and she says,
I don't have enough to even have a cake.
I just have a handful, and my plan is that we're going to just simply make it and eat
it and die.
Now, the reality is that for most of us this morning, our, even when we say there's no
food to eat, we have plenty of food to eat.
At times in our lives, we might hear a child, maybe your children might say something like
this, even after a Sunday morning, I'm starving.
And the truth of the matter is that I don't think any of us truly know what starvation
feels like.
But truly, the lack brought discouragement.
I'm going to make this and we're going to eat it, we're going to die.
Look at the truth in 2 Kings chapter 4.
We see it here as well.
Now, this is Elisha that's ministering at this particular time, and Elisha is taking
up the mantle, is serving the Lord, and we find that there's a widow here in 2 Kings
chapter 4, and she has two sons.
Her husband's died, and the Bible gives us the idea, the context here in verse number
1 of 2 Kings 4, now there cried a certain woman of the wives of the sons of the prophets
unto Elisha, saying, Thy servant, my husband, is dead.
And now knowest that thy servant did fear the Lord, and notice what she says, the creditor
is come to take unto him my two sons to be bondmen.
And Elisha said unto her, What shall I do for thee?
Tell me, what hast thou in the house?
And she said, Thine handmaid hath not anything in the house.
Notice what she says, Save a pot of oil.
God was going to do a great miracle here in this passage of Scripture, just like He did
with the widow at Zarephath.
As you were to continue to read in 1 Kings chapter 17, God provided for her and her son
the blessing that God gave.
And here, this pot of oil, He would give instruction to Elisha with regard to borrowing the vessels
and to be able to sell the oil and to be able to live, to pay the debt and live with her
children, but understand the discouragement.
She understood, my husband is dead, I have just two sons, and the creditor is coming
to take them as bondmen.
By the way, that was appropriate practice with regard to what was going on in their
situation, and we find that she was grieving and she was discouraged.
We have this debt and we cannot pay it, and I have nothing in the house save a pot of
oil.
She doesn't say it, but it almost could be understood that, what is that going to do?
And I want you to understand that as we look here in the book of James and we see the admonition
that's given and we'll make much application as we get through the message this morning,
but I want you to understand foundationally that a lack can bring discouragement, but
I want you to understand this as well, number two, that excess can deceive.
A lack of wealth can discourage, but an excess of wealth can deceive.
We see in verse 10 and 11 in what beautiful imagery God uses in painting this picture,
similar to what we read in the book of Proverbs in chapter 23, where here the Bible says,
but the rich, in verse 10, in that he is made low, notice it says, because as the flower
of the grass he shall pass away, for the sun is no sooner risen with a burning heat, but
it withereth the grass, and the flower thereof falleth, and the grace of the fashion of it
perisheth, so also shall the rich man fade away in his ways.
We find that the imagery would be something that the people would so easily be able to
relate to and understand when that hot, when the sun would reach its height and the heat
of that sun and how it would impact the flowers, and it says there in verse number 11 how that
the flower thereof falleth, and understanding the heat during the summer.
We had, what do they call them, morning glories, is that what they're called?
We had them out in our garden, I don't know how they got there, a bird transplanted them,
and we had these morning glories in our garden, and I'm telling you, in the morning they were
absolutely beautiful, but when the sun got up, guess what happened to those things?
Right?
Holly was out there taking pictures, I mean they're beautiful, but then in just several
hours the sun, the heat, had an impact, and we find that God would use that imagery to
help people have an understanding, why?
Because we need to have a biblical perspective when it comes to finances, and I'm gonna get
into a number of things here in just a moment, but I want you to notice that as he talks
about the one that's of low degree, but also the one that's rich, and he talks about the
idea that they're to rejoice, and we understand, again, rejoice evermore, that whether I have
whatever it is that I have, that I'm to rejoice, and the one in verse number 9, again,
naturally easier, the one that has a lack, but then has that increase, has that time
of being exalted, it's easy to rejoice.
But the rich, when he is made low, a little bit more complicated.
But I want you to understand this morning that an excess can cause deception.
You know, there are a lot of people that are deceived by the statement on their bank account.
And riches make wings, that's what the Bible tells us.
And so, why is it that they get deceived?
Because too often they put their confidence in how much they have.
Even still to this day, our currency says, in God we trust.
But understand that many people place their trust in the currency, not in God.
And we see it.
There's been times in our history where we've had great market declines.
And it's had a major impact on a lot of people.
There's going to come a time, as you study in the book of Revelation, and it's going
to be in the tribulation, that a day's wage is going to be enough to just buy a day's
portion of food, a ration of food.
And we don't live in that time today here in America.
I understand there are some countries that live and they have that type of economic crisis.
But I want you to understand this morning that when sometimes when there's an excess,
people put their confidence in that excess.
Right now, and I don't want to get into the economics of it, but right now there's a lot
of, you know, increase that seems to be going on.
And I understand there's a lot of conversation with regard to whether that's all manufactured
and how real that is and so on and so forth.
But we see a lot of those things in our society, and it causes people to have a lot of confidence.
It's deceptive.
Let me remind you of Luke chapter 12.
Turn there, if you will, with me in Luke chapter number 12.
And I'm going to read the entirety of the portion of Scripture.
It's a lengthier portion of Scripture, but I think it's important that we gather all
of what's taking place here.
Oftentimes people can be, when we think about this excess, this idea and the deception,
we live in an environment, we live in a culture that's so focused on more and more.
We find here in Luke chapter number 12 and verse 13, it says this,
And one of the company said unto him, Master, speak to my brother that he divide the inheritance
with me.
And he, Jesus, said unto him, Man, who made me a judge or a divider over you?
And he said unto them, Take heed and beware of covetousness.
Oh, there's a lot of covetousness in our world today, really is.
For a man's life consisteth not in the abundance of the things which he possesseth.
He spake a parable unto them, saying, The ground of a certain rich man brought forth
plentifully.
And he thought within himself, saying, What shall I do?
Because I have no room where to bestow my fruits.
And he said, This will I do.
I will pull down my barns and build greater.
There will I bestow all my fruits and my goods.
And I will say to my soul, Soul, thou hast much good laid up for many years.
Take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry.
But God said unto him, Thou fool, this night thy soul shall be required of thee.
Then who shall those things be which thou hast provided?
So is he that layeth up treasure for himself and is not rich toward God.
I'll continue reading in just a moment, but let's look at what's happening here.
When God uses this example, this illustration of this rich man and his property, I mean,
he brings forth plentifully as much fruit and he says, What am I going to do with all
of this?
And I'm going to tear down these barns and I'm going to be greater.
And I'm going to be able to bestow all of my fruits and goods in this.
And oh, I'm going to say, Soul, thou hast much.
And I mean, just take it easy and just be merry.
And God says, This night shall thy soul be required of thee.
And I've said this over the years, but oftentimes, again, we live in a culture and a society
where even amongst the people of God, unfortunately, there's oftentimes more emphasis that is placed
upon retirement planning than there is on eternal planning.
It is not a guarantee that any one of us will see retirement.
It's not a guarantee, but it's absolutely certain that every single one of us will face
the Lord one day.
Amen?
It's absolutely certain.
And I'm not suggesting that we shouldn't plan for retirement.
I'm not suggesting that we shouldn't be good stewards.
But what I'm saying to us is there's got to be a proper perspective, a biblical perspective
when it comes to those things.
And we find that here, God talks about that in verse 21, So is he that layeth up treasure
for himself and is not rich toward God.
The fact that we can lay up treasures in heaven, amen, praise the Lord, making investments
in eternity and how God would allow us to be able to do that.
And we find that as we continue reading in verse 22, and he said unto his disciples,
and so he uses this, this teaching moment, this man comes to Jesus and says, tell my
brother that he divide the inheritance with me.
And Jesus gives this, this truth, this parable, if we could use that phraseology.
And we find that he comes to verse 22 and he says unto his disciples, now notice what
he says to his disciples, again, as he takes that moment and now looks directly to his
disciples and he's going to give them truth.
He's going to teach them a lesson, a valuable lesson.
And notice what he says, Therefore I say unto you, take no thought for your life, what ye
shall eat, neither for the body, what ye shall put on.
The life is more than meat and the body is more than raiment.
Neither the ravens, for they neither sow nor reap, excuse me, which neither have storehouse
nor barn, and God feedeth them.
Now notice this phrase, how much more are ye better than the fowls?
God created the birds.
Amen.
You read Genesis 1, you read the record, God created the birds.
But the crown of his creation is mankind.
Jesus didn't die for the birds, but he died for human beings.
We are of more value, and let me remind you that he knows when the bird falls, amen?
And he says that we're of more value.
How much more are you better than the fowls?
And which of you with taking thought can add to a stature one cubit?
The answer is none of us.
Verse 26, If ye then be not able to do that thing which is least, why take ye thought
for the rest?
Consider the lilies, how they grow, they toil not, they spin not, and yet I say unto
you that Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these.
Now that's a great illustration, because Solomon, I mean, you think about the wealth and the
wisdom and how people would come in, and I've never seen anything like this.
And God says, the Lord Jesus Christ, he says that consider the lilies, and he says, I say
unto you that Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these.
Have you ever seen the beauty of just creation?
We saw some flowers on our trip that I've never seen before because we're in a tropic
location.
I've never seen some of those types of flowers before, and sometimes you see certain things.
Have you ever tried to take a picture of something and it just doesn't quite capture?
You look back at the picture and you're like, it doesn't really do it justice.
And here the Lord Jesus Christ is saying, when you consider the lilies, he talked about
the fowls, the ravens and the fowls, and now he's considering the lilies.
If then, verse 28, God so clothed the grass which is today in the field and tomorrow is
cast in the oven, how much more will he clothe you, O ye of little faith?
And seek not ye what ye shall eat or what ye shall drink, neither be ye of doubtful
mind.
For all these things do the nations of the world seek after, and your father knoweth
that ye have need of these things, but rather seek ye the kingdom of God, and all these
things shall be added unto you.
Fear not, little flock, for it is your father's good pleasure to give you the kingdom.
Sell that ye have and give alms, provide for yourselves bags which wax not old, a treasure
in the heavens that faileth not, where no thief approacheth, neither moth corrupteth.
For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.
And begin to understand some of the principles that we find here in the book of Luke in this
passage of scripture with regard to finances, and when we think about the truth of James
1 and verse 9 through 11, I said this, that a lack of wealth can discourage, but an excess
of wealth can deceive.
And we see it in our world.
We see it, we can look at illustrations, we can look at examples, we see it biblically,
but we see it also in our world.
Let me remind us this morning of the wonderful principles as the Lord teaches His disciples
and we close out this portion of scripture, that God knows what we have need of.
I'm thankful that God not only knows what we have need of, but God provides for us.
And I would say this, that when we have a proper perspective of finances, we understand
that God would then allow us to take some of what He's given to us and use it as we
give it back to him for his honor and for his glory.
It's a tremendous blessing.
Last Sunday morning, I had the privilege of standing
in a church and preaching in a church
that 10 years ago wasn't there.
And 10 years ago, our church supported
that missionary family, Roth and Carasoto, that were going.
He is from Hawaii and he was going back to Hawaii
to start a church and starting a church in an area
where they needed to have a church.
I never in a million years thought I would ever go to Hawaii.
I've never had any interest in ever going to Hawaii.
I still would say that I never would wanna live
in Hawaii for sure, but the reality is that the Navy
moved our daughter and son-in-law and two grandkids
to Hawaii and so it became an opportunity for us
to go and visit with them and then I got to preach
in that church.
But you know what we did?
We made an investment as a church family.
If you give to missions as I give, as Holly and I give
to missions every single month, we give of our resources
to give to missions and then collectively, corporately,
we take and we support missionaries and for a couple,
probably four years, we supported the Soto family
to see that church established and then I got to stand
in that pulpit and see those folks and just rejoice
in what God has done, an investment that God allowed me
to see the opportunity to see it personally
with my own eyes, otherwise I'd only ever read about it
or seen pictures of it, but now our daughter and son-in-law
and our grandkids are able to be part of that church
that 10 years ago wasn't there.
Can I tell you that we could repeat that story
over and over and over again, why?
Because you give to missions and we have the privilege
of supporting all these missionaries and seeing
all these churches established and souls being saved
and lives being changed and why?
It's an investment and God gives us those resources,
he knows what our needs are and he takes good care of us
and he says that where your treasure is,
there will your heart be also and what a blessing
as we think about and we won't turn there,
but the perspective from 1 Chronicles 29
that God would allow us, not only would God give to us
in the first place, but then allow us to give back to him
for his honor, for his glory, what a blessing.
And so we see in James 1 verses 9 through 11
that there's two various groups that are spoken to,
the one that's of low degree and the one that is rich
and we understand that we're to rejoice,
we're to have that joy, count it all joy
when you fall into divers temptations
and those various trials and I'm not sure
where you are in your life today,
but I know that I could stand here and say to you personally
and transparently that there have been times
that there have been financial struggles
and if you're a young couple, I'm sure,
if you can remember back to your days
of being a young couple,
there were financial hardships and struggles
and man, you're just trusting the Lord
and you're just trusting the Lord
and you just continue to tithe and continue to be faithful
and you see God provide and you see God bless.
Sometimes those financial trials will come into our lives,
but what are we to do?
Well, we're to count it joy, we're to rejoice.
When the one that's of low degree is exalted
and again, much easier, but he's to rejoice
when the one that is rich, that is made low,
much more challenging is to rejoice, why?
Because God is good all the time,
because God is good all the time.
Now, as we begin to understand these thoughts
that are given here with regard to the fact
that a lack can bring discouragement
and an excess can bring deception,
as believers, I believe it's important
that we maintain a biblical perspective.
So as we close out the message this morning,
I wanna give you four thoughts,
four principles that would help us
to maintain a biblical perspective
when it comes to our finances.
Number one, and we just read it
in the book of Luke in the 12th chapter,
but number one, recognize that God knows and God supplies.
Recognize that God knows and God supplies.
We just read it in Luke chapter 12,
you can see it also in Matthew 6 and verses 31 through 34,
and I'm thankful to know that God is aware.
God created us, listen, when the children of Israel
complained about their water being no water
or being bitter water, God knew that they needed water.
He created them, he knew their need.
When they complained that there was no food,
God knew that they needed food
and God was able to provide and God did provide.
We find this morning that we must recognize this morning,
if we're going to have and maintain
a proper biblical perspective when it comes to our finances,
if we're going to be able to rejoice,
whether in time of gain or in time of loss,
knowing that God is good,
that we must recognize that God knows and God supplies.
I would say this, number two, a perspective,
a principle that we need to be mindful of
is that we are to rejoice in whatsoever state you are in.
And I'm not talking about the Commonwealth of Virginia
or the state of whatever,
I'm talking about whatever state we're in.
Look at Philippians chapter number four, if you will.
Again, a familiar passage of scripture for many of us,
but I want to remind you what the apostle Paul says
in Philippians chapter four with regard to a principle
that is so important for us as the people of God
to truly grasp and to apply in our own lives,
because we're to be doers of the word and not hearers only.
In Philippians four, I referenced earlier
that he said in verse number four,
rejoice in the Lord always.
And again, I say rejoice,
but Paul's going to deal with something very specific
related to what we see in James chapter number one
in these verses that we're looking at
with regard to finances.
Notice in verse 10 of Philippians four,
notice what Paul says,
but I rejoiced in the Lord greatly,
that now at the last your care of me
hath flourished again,
wherein you were also careful, but you lacked opportunity.
Not that I speak in respect of want,
for I have learned in whatsoever state I am therewith
to be content.
Wow.
I know I've said this multiple times over the years,
and I'm going to say it again this morning.
I cannot say as Paul says in verse number 11
that I have learned.
I think honestly, I can simply say I am learning.
I've not arrived.
I'm learning in whatsoever state I am therewith
to be content.
He says in verse number 12,
I know both how to be abased,
and I know how to abound.
Everywhere and in all things,
I am instructed both to be full and to be hungry,
both to abound and to suffer need.
I can do all things through Christ, which strengtheneth me.
I know that verse 13 is often used
by many of our Christian schools
for their athletic departments
and putting it on a jersey for a basketball team
or a soccer team or whatever it may be,
but the reality is that that's not what that's talking about.
It's not talking about I can make a basket
because God strengthens me,
or I can make a goal because God strengthens me.
I can do all things that God has called me to do,
all things that he has expected of me to do.
Why?
Because he strengthens me.
And what a blessing to know.
Listen, I've said this,
and it's important for us to recognize
that what God instructs us to do,
he enables us to do.
God's never given to his people a command
that he's not given us the ability to be able to fulfill,
and he strengthens us, and I'm thankful.
And Paul says, I know how to be abased,
and I know how to abound.
And can I tell you, in the life of the Apostle Paul,
there were various times in which he had that transition
where there were times where he was abounding,
and there were times where he was suffering need.
And Paul says, I've learned in whatsoever state I'm in,
whether it's in the time of abounding
or in the time of having need,
I have learned to be content.
What a great principle for us as the people of God.
We live in a society that thrives on,
and that pushes covetousness,
a society that tells you that you need more,
and you need more, and you need more,
and how much is enough?
Just a little more is enough.
And then when you get that, just a little more is enough,
and that's the society, that's the culture that we live in.
But we find that Paul says, I have learned to be content.
So we recognize that God knows,
and that God supplies, we rejoice,
in whatsoever state we're in.
Number three, these principles that will help us
to maintain this biblical perspective,
we must remain focused on the Lord and on eternity.
We must remain focused on the Lord and on eternity.
In 2 Corinthians chapter number four,
a portion of scripture that we studied through last year
with regard to our theme,
and studying through the book of 2 Corinthians,
but Paul talks about this eternal perspective.
The reality is that as we look at this truth this morning,
and we'll remain focused on the Lord and on eternity,
Paul says in 2 Corinthians four and verse 17,
"'For our light affliction, which is but for a moment,
"'worketh for us a far more exceeding
"'and eternal weight of glory,
"'while we look not at the things which are seen,
"'but at the things which are not seen,
"'for the things which are seen are temporal,
"'but the things which are not seen are eternal.'"
You know, the markets move, they fluctuate.
And if you're constantly watching the markets.
and your joy and your rejoicing is based upon whether the markets are up or the markets
are down, you have a temporal perspective. And it's absolutely critical and it's crucial
for us to have an eternal perspective. Because can I tell you that if the markets fall completely
flat tomorrow, and I would say, listen, I hope that doesn't happen. But if it did,
God is still on His throne and God is still faithful and we still need to serve Him, amen?
Because God is good and He's God. And my joy, my rejoicing can't be based upon the markets
are up or the markets, no, no, no. My focus is on eternity. It's on eternity. And I want
to have, I want to remain focused. You say, but we live in this world and there's certain
things that we have to do. I understand all of that. We're in the world, but we're not
of the world. And I understand that it's important that we have some level of planning, but we
need to be careful to keep balance in all of that. I mentioned earlier about folks that
think more about retirement planning than they do about eternal planning. Can I tell
you that the reality this morning, we're talking about the subject of finances and looking
at the application. And it's true that we all deal with it. It's something that every
single one of us can relate to. But the reality is that every single one of us is going to
die one day. And the question to the rich man is when he dies, your soul is going to
be required of you this night. Whose are those things? You said, well, I have a will that's
going to determine all of that. I have a, okay, but, but they're not yours is the point.
You're not taking it with you. Amen. You're not taking it with you. You can't, it's impossible.
But every single person is going to stand before God one day. Can I tell you this morning
that if you're not sure of heaven, if you've not trusted Jesus Christ, your personal savior,
that today is the day of salvation. People that are working, what shall it profit a man
if he gained the whole world, but lose his own soul? Right? Is that what Jesus said?
And we find this morning that there are people, unfortunately, that they are all, I mean,
they're super skilled and super learned in the area of finances and investments and all
these types of things. But, but one day they're going to meet the Lord. And the most important
thing at that moment is not what their portfolio has. The most important thing at that moment
is whether they've been saved by the blood of Jesus Christ. Amen? Because rich or poor,
every single one is going to stand before God. Amen? When you read the account in the
book of Luke of the rich man and Lazarus, the rich man didn't go to hell and Lazarus
go to heaven because of their social status. It wasn't because he was rich that he went
to hell and he was a beggar that he went to heaven. That's not the issue. The issue is
whether or not you trust that Jesus Christ is your personal savior. Amen? And so we find
this morning that we're to focus on the Lord and on eternity. And when we remain focused
on the Lord and eternity and we understand, yes, we have these needs. We live in this
world. We live in an expensive area. I heard that so many times while we were visiting
Hawaii and it indeed is an expensive area. Extremely. This area is expensive. That area
is expensive. And I understand that you need the, the, the resources to be able to live
and so on and so forth. But God knows all of that. And remain focused on eternity and
on the Lord. And let me say this, and I hope this helps us this morning. Number four, the
fourth principle that I want to share with you that I think will help us to maintain
a biblical perspective is this. Remember what you have that money cannot buy. Remember what
you have that money cannot buy. Can I tell you, number one, you have salvation. If you're
here this morning and you've been saved by the blood of Christ, listen. He tells us to
rejoice. In fact, in Luke chapter number 10, he tells the disciples, they come back rejoicing
because the spirits are made subject to them. And, and Jesus says to them, listen, in this
rejoice not, but rather rejoice that your names are written in heaven. Ephesians two
verses eight and nine, for by grace are you saved through faith and that not of yourselves.
It is the gift of God, not of works, lest any man should boast. Listen, if you're saved
here this morning, it's because God paid for your salvation. When the Lord Jesus Christ
went to the cross of Calvary and he paid with his precious blood, we read it in Colossians
one, in verse number 14, that we're redeemed. He talks about there in Colossians one, the
forgiveness of sins that we have that in whom we have redemption through his blood, even
the forgiveness of sins. We find that in first Peter, he talks about the fact that we're
redeemed not with corruptible things such as silver and gold, no, but with the precious
blood of Christ. And I'm so thankful this morning that I have salvation. I've been saved
by the grace of God, that he loved me enough, that he died for me and he shed his blood
on the cross of Calvary. He was buried and he rose again and he offered to me that free
gift of eternal life and he offered it to you as well. And we have salvation. Listen,
forever and ever and ever and ever, I'm going to be with my Lord. Praise God. Money cannot
buy that. You can go to some places in this world and you can see these great mansions
and you can see these beautiful places. In fact, a man in the church that were there
last week, he told us about a place that sold, that was the most expensive place from what
he told us that's ever sold on the island. And it sold for $62 million. I can't even
really wrap my mind around that. It began to tell us how many bedrooms this place had
and how many of this and all of this. Listen, according to second Peter chapter three, it's
all going to burn one day. Is that what you read in your Bible? That's what I read in
my Bible. It's all going to burn one day. Listen, I have something that money cannot
buy. And so do you if you're saved here this morning. You know, a lot of people that are
trying to buy their salvation, they're trying to earn their salvation through their good
works, through whatever it is that they think, through religion. Listen, it can't save. If
righteousness come by the law, then Christ is dead in vain is what Paul says in the book
of Galatians. And righteousness cannot come by the law. For we understand that the righteousness
of God is imputed on us. For God hath made him Jesus to be sin for us who knew no sin
that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. What a joy. Listen, this morning,
we need to remember what we have that money cannot buy. We have salvation. Can I say this?
We have peace. Peace with God, but the peace of God. There's only one way to have peace
with God, and that's through the Lord Jesus Christ. But we find that the peace of God,
which passeth all understanding, we read in the book of Philippians, we read in the book
of Colossians, that we're to let the peace of God rule in our hearts. And can I tell
you that we live in a world that a lot of people are looking for peace. They want peace.
They're longing for peace. Mark and I were knocking doors several weeks ago, a couple
of months ago at this point. We're knocking doors, and literally a man stood there and
said to both Mark and I with his lip quivering under great conviction, he said, I covet what
you have. You know what we said? You can have it. Jesus offers it. And sadly, he said, I
just, I'm not ready. But he was visibly shaking and saying, I want what you have. Can I tell
you this morning, I'm thankful for the peace of God that passeth all understanding. I'm
thankful this morning that in times of difficulty and trials that we can have that peace, that
peace that God brings. We find, again, the list could just be exhaustive of so many things
that we have that money cannot buy. I want to close with this. Our time is almost gone.
Instead of continuing to give you a list of things, let me look at Revelation chapter
2, and I want to remind you of how the Lord refers to the church in Smyrna. In Revelation
chapter 2, and then we see the last church that's mentioned in chapter 3, the church
of the Laodiceans, but I want you to know in Revelation chapter 2, and I've referred
to the church in Smyrna as the poor, rich church. Because the Bible says this in verse
number 9 of Revelation 2, I know thy works in tribulation and poverty, but thou art rich.
I know thy poverty, but thou art rich. You say, is there a conflict there? Is there a
contradiction there? No, they were in deep poverty physically, temporally, but oh, the
riches that they had in Christ. The riches that they had in Christ. And he says, but
thou art rich, and I know the blasphemy of them which say they are Jews and are not,
but are the synagogue of Satan. But I want you to just focus there on how he refers to
the church in Smyrna, the poor, rich church. And then we see the church of the Laodiceans
when he talks to them, and I've referred to them as the rich, poor church. They were increased
with goods. They said they had need of nothing. But God said that they were, notice in verse
17, because thou sayest in Revelation 3 and verse 17,
because thou sayest, I am rich and increased with goods and have need of nothing, and knowest
not that thou art wretched and miserable and poor and blind and naked." The church of
the Laodiceans was really the rich-poor church. They were increased with goods. They had need
of nothing. But the Lord Jesus Christ was standing on the outside of His church knocking
on the door. They didn't even really need God, quote-unquote. I mean, we know they need
God, but they just figured out how to just do it. I'd rather be the poor-rich church
than the rich-poor church. Amen? I'd rather be the poor-rich believer than the rich-poor
individual. Amen? Because we have so many things that money cannot buy. In Proverbs
30, you don't need to turn that. I'll just read it for you. The wise man says this. We
read a portion from chapter 23 to begin. In Proverbs 30, remove far, verse 8, from me
vanity and lies. Give me neither poverty nor riches. Feed me with food convenient for me.
Lest I be full and deny thee, and say, Who is the Lord? Or lest I be poor and steal,
and take the name of my God in vain. Riches make wings. And as believers, James deals
with trials to start the book. I mean, he just jumps right into it. And sometimes those
trials come by way of financial trials. And James is going to give this example, this
admonition to rejoice. Because you've counted it all joy. You've understood. You've developed
a proper perspective with regard to trials. And now, when the trial actually comes, here's
what you're to do. And for us this morning, it's not just about having some level of intellect.
It's not about having some theory. The Bible is not a book just of theory. The Bible is
a book of practice. Amen? It's a book that we take and we apply. And so, we understand
the ability or the truth that when there's a lack, it can bring discouragement. When
there's excess, it can bring deception. But I want to focus my attention on what should
my perspective be? What are the principles that God has given me from his word with regard
to finances that can help me to maintain a proper biblical perspective? And I must keep
my eyes on the Lord. This morning, I understand we all need money to live. Understand that.
We live in an economy that's driven by finances, by money. But we have to have a biblical perspective
when it comes to our finances. And we understand that, listen, riches make wings and they fly
away. And what happens in your life and in my life if that were to happen? Do we become
discouraged, depressed, overwhelmed? What are we going to do? What do we say? God knows.
God's able. God will provide because he knows what we need. And he is able to take care
of us. Let's pray together. Father, we love you. We thank you for loving us. We thank
you for the practical nature of your word. And as we study through the book of James
in this calendar year, and we come to a number of subjects like this one that will be so
applicable, Lord, I pray that you'd help us to be doers of the word. Help us, Lord,
to develop a biblical perspective, to take biblical principles and to apply them in our
lives. Fathers, we consider the truth this morning that we remember the things that
we have that money cannot buy and we begin that list by speaking of the salvation that
we have through our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ. Perhaps there's one here this morning
or one that's tuned in via live stream that's not sure of heaven. Maybe they have thought
that they could do good things to earn their salvation. Maybe they've tried to follow
some religious particular mandate. I don't know what it may be. But, Lord, I pray that
they would recognize even this morning that one day they'll stand before you as to point
it unto man once to die, but after this, the judgment. Lord, if they're not sure of heaven,
I pray that today they'd get that settled. We'd have an opportunity to take a Bible and
show them how they could know for sure that heaven is their home, that they could be a
recipient of eternal life, that they'd receive the gift of God, which is eternal life through
Jesus Christ, our Lord. But, God, I pray for those that are saved already this morning
that are here. Lord, we live in this world, but we're not of this world. Would you help
us to have a biblical perspective even in the area of our finances? Lord, help us to
take and apply truth. Help us, Lord, to be doers of the Word. We'll thank you for the
work that you'll do. For it's in Christ's name we pray. Would you stand with me? Heads
are bowed, eyes are closed. We'll have a moment of invitation, just give you an opportunity
to respond. Maybe you want to thank the Lord, you want to rejoice in what God's provided
for you. Maybe you're not sure of heaven. If you're a lady, Holly's here, take a Bible,
show you how you can know for sure that heaven's your home. If you're a man, Mark is here,
take a Bible, show you how you can know for sure that heaven is your home. But as Kimberly
plays, the altar is open.